## Constructions
Recall the exponential map $\exp: \mathfrak{g} \to G$.
### Lie algebra from Lie group
There are a couple constructions for a Lie algebra given a Lie group.
#### Approach via left invariant vector fields (general case)
Let $G$ be a Lie group, $X_{1_{G}} \in T_{1_{G}}G$ a tangent vector at the identity, and $X\in \mathfrak{g}$ the corresponding left invariant vector field generated by $X_{1_{G}}$. Since $X$ is complete, we have for any $g \in G$, a unique integral curve of $X$, $\gamma_{g}: \mathbb{R} \to G$ with $\gamma_{g}(0)=g$. 

One such integral curve is $\phi:=\gamma_{{1_{G}}}$ which is a homomorphism $\mathbb{R} \to G$, and hence a [[One-parameter subgroup|one-parameter subgroup]]. 

So $\mathfrak{g}$ can be considered as the tangent space $T_{1_{G}} G$ with the Lie bracket being the bracket of vector fields, evaluated at $1_{G}$.

#### Approach via matrix Lie groups
Let $G$ be a closed subgroup of $GL_{n}(F)$, so a Lie group. Then the associated Lie algebra is 
$$
\mathfrak{g}=\text{Lie}(G)=\{ X \in M_{n}(F) \;\vert\; e^{tX} \in G \;\; \forall t \in \mathbb{R} \}
$$
The Lie bracket is the commutator.

### Lie group from Lie algebra
The map $\exp: \mathfrak{g} \to G$ can recover some, but not necessarily all, of $G$. That is, it may not be surjective.



~~Note that this mapping isn't necessarily surjective, so we may not be able to recover all of $G$ from the $\exp$ map. The cases where it's surjective are:
- $G$ is connected and compact
- $G$ is connected and nilpotent
- $G = GL(n,\mathbb{C})$.~~



### Local homeomorphism 
Let $G$ be a matrix Lie group with Lie algebra $\mathfrak{g}$. There exists an open neighbourhood $0 \in U \subset \mathfrak{g}$ and an open neighbourhood $I \in V \subseteq G$ such that $\exp(U)=V$ is a homeomorphism.


## Homomorphisms of Lie objects

### Induced homomorphism of algebras
If $\Phi: G \to H$ is a homomorphism of Lie groups, then there is an associated map $\phi:\mathfrak{g} \to \mathfrak{h}$ that is a homomorphism of Lie algebras.

This map is defined as $\phi(X)=Y$ where $Y$ is the unique matrix in $\mathfrak{h}$ associated to the one-parameter subgroup $\Phi(\exp(tX))$ of $H$.
#### Proof (matrix Lie groups)
For $X \in \mathfrak{g}$, let $t \mapsto \exp(tX)$ be its [[One-parameter subgroup|one-parameter subgroup]]. 
Then due to the homomorphism $\Phi$, the associated one-parameter subgroup of $H$ is $\Phi(\exp(tX))$. This corresponds to a unique matrix $Y \in \mathfrak{h}$. 
Define a map $\phi: \mathfrak{g} \to \mathfrak{h}$ with $\phi(X)=Y$. This is a homomorphism of algebras.

##### Alternative definition
Let $f: G \to H$ be a Lie group homomorphism. Then the map $df=df_{1_{G}}: \text{Lie}(G) \to \text{Lie}(H)$ is a homomorphism of Lie algebras. 

*Note that since the Lie group has the exponential as its one-parameter subgroup, this is map is in fact*
$$
df(X)=\frac{d}{dt} \vert_{t=0}\; f(\exp(tX))
$$

This map has the following properties:
1. $\exp(df(X))=f(\exp(X))$ for all $X\in \text{Lie}(G)$.
2. $\text{Lie}(\text{ker}(f))=\text{ker}(df)$.
3. If $\text{im}(f)$ is closed, then $\text{Lie}(\text{im}(f))=\text{im}(df)$.
	1. By the first isomorphism theorem, $G / \text{ker}(f) \to \text{im}(f)$ is an isomorphism.
4. If $H$ is closed, then $\text{Lie}(H)$ is a Lie subalgebra of $\text{Lie}(G)$.



### Induced local homomorphism of groups
Let $\phi: \mathfrak{g} \to \mathfrak{h}$ be a homomorphism of Lie algebras. This induces a local homomorphism of Lie groups $\Phi: G \to H$ on the identity component of $G$, defined by $$
\Phi(e^X)=e^{\phi(X)}
$$
#### Proof (matrix Lie groups)
Let $\phi:\mathfrak{g} \to \mathfrak{h}$ be a Lie algebra homomorphism, with $0 \in U \subset \mathfrak{g}$ and $I \in V \subset G$ such that $\exp(U)=V$ (i.e. the neighbourhoods where there is a local homeomorphism via $\exp$).

We claim $\Phi:G \to H$ defined by $\Phi(e^X)=e^{\phi(X)}$ is a Lie group homomorphism.

To see this, note (via [[Baker-Campbell-Hausdorff formula|BCH]]) that the Lie algebra homomorphism $\phi$ satisfies $$
\begin{align}
\phi(\log(e^X e^Y)) &= \phi\left( X+Y+\frac{1}{2} [X,Y] +\dots \right) \\
&=\phi(X)+\phi(Y)+\frac{1}{2} [\phi(X), \phi(Y)]+\dots \\
&= \log(e^{\phi(X)} e^{\phi(Y)})
\end{align}
$$
So $$
\Phi(e^X e^Y)=\Phi(e^{\log(e^X e^Y)})=e^{\log(e^{\phi(X)} e^{\phi(Y)})}=e^{\phi(X)} e^{\phi(Y)}=\Phi(e^X) \Phi(e^Y)
$$

### Global homomorphism
For the local homomorphism $\Phi: G \to H$, we defined $\Phi=\exp \circ \phi \circ \log$ over the domain where $G,H$ and $\mathfrak{g}, \mathfrak{h}$ are locally homeomorphic.

Let $\eta: [0,1] \to G$ be a path with $\eta(0)=1_{G}$ and $\eta(1)=g$. Then there is $|t-s|<\delta$ such that $\eta(t)\eta(s)^{-1}\in V \subset G$. Define a partition $0<t_{1}<\dots<t_{m}=1$. 

For $g \in G$, define the global homomorphism as $$
\Phi(g):=\prod_{j=1}^m \Phi(\eta(t_{j-1})\eta(t_{j})^{-1})
$$
That is, the factors in $\Phi(g)$ are local homomorphisms on a small step along the path from $1_{G}$ to $g$. This works because the Lie algebra homomorphism respects the group structure in any local neighbourhood, and we can patch these neighbourhoods together.

*Note: due to the path, this only works on points which are path connected to the group identity. That is, it's global on the identity component.*

Alternatively (and more succinctly), because $\Phi$ is analytic (locally agreeing with a convergent power series), **analytic extension is possible over a connected, simply connected set**.


## What do the group and algebra say about each other?
Broadly, the Lie algebra $\mathfrak{g}$ of the Lie group $G$ determines everything that happens in a small neighbourhood of $1_{G} \in G$. That is, $\mathfrak{g}$ knows $G$ locally.
### Examples
Consider the group isomorphism$$
\begin{align}
\phi:\mathbb{R} &\to GL(2,\mathbb{C}) \\
a &\mapsto \begin{pmatrix}
1 & a \\
0 & 1
\end{pmatrix}
\end{align}
$$
The image $\phi(\mathbb{R})=GL(2,\mathbb{C})$ is a matrix Lie group, with Lie algebra $$
\text{Lie}(\phi(\mathbb{R}))=\{ X\in M(2,\mathbb{C}) \;|\; e^{tX}\in \phi(\mathbb{R}) \; \forall t\in \mathbb{R}\}
$$
